doc/installation.rst, before:

.. |br| raw:: html

    <br />

Installation
============

Install the *mhn* package using *pip*
-------------------------------------

Since the *mhn* package is largely written in `Cython <https://cython.org/>`_, a `Cython-supported C compiler <https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/quickstart/install.html>`_,
such as GCC or MSVC, must be installed on your device before you can install this package. |br|
If that is the case, you can simply install the *mhn* package using *pip*:

.. code-block:: console

    pip install mhn

If the installation of *mhn* was successful, you should be able to import it with

.. code-block:: python

    import mhn

Use the CUDA implementation to accelerate score computations
------------------------------------------------------------

If your device has an Nvidia GPU, you can accelerate the computation of the log-likelihood score and its gradient for both the full and the restricted state-space with CUDA. For that you have to have CUDA and the CUDA compiler installed on your device. You can check that in the terminal with

.. code-block:: console

    nvcc --version

If this command is recognized, then CUDA should be installed on your device.
During installation the package will automatically check if the CUDA compiler
is installed on your device and will enable the corresponding functions if this is the case.
While running a Python script you can test if the *mhn* package has access to GPU-accelerated
functions using the :code:`cuda_available()` function as shown below:

.. code-block:: python

    import mhn

    print(mhn.cuda_available())

    # the three possible results are also available as constants:
    # CUDA_AVAILABLE, CUDA_NOT_AVAILABLE, CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_AVAILABLE:
        print('CUDA is available')

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_NOT_AVAILABLE:
        print('CUDA compiler nvcc was not present during installation')

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL:
        print('CUDA compiler nvcc available but CUDA functions not working. Check CUDA installation')

Be especially aware of the :code:`CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL` case: This means that the CUDA compiler is installed on your device but basic functionalities like allocating memory on the GPU are not working as expected. In this case something is probably wrong with your CUDA drivers and you should check your CUDA installation.

If you installed *nvcc* after installing the *mhn* package, you have to reinstall this package to gain access to the CUDA functions.

Commit message:

updated documentation to include the INSTALL_MHN_NO_CUDA env variable

doc/installation.rst, after:

.. |br| raw:: html

    <br />

Installation
============

Install the *mhn* package using *pip*
-------------------------------------

Since the *mhn* package is largely written in `Cython <https://cython.org/>`_, a `Cython-supported C compiler <https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/quickstart/install.html>`_,
such as GCC or MSVC, must be installed on your device before you can install this package. |br|
If that is the case, you can simply install the *mhn* package using *pip*:

.. code-block:: console

    pip install mhn

If the installation of *mhn* was successful, you should be able to import it with

.. code-block:: python

    import mhn

Use the CUDA implementation to accelerate score computations
------------------------------------------------------------

If your device has an Nvidia GPU, you can accelerate the computation of the log-likelihood score and its gradient for both the full and the restricted state-space with CUDA. For that you have to have CUDA and the CUDA compiler installed on your device. You can check that in the terminal with

.. code-block:: console

    nvcc --version

If this command is recognized, then CUDA should be installed on your device.
During installation the package will automatically check if the CUDA compiler
is installed on your device and will enable the corresponding functions if this is the case.
While running a Python script you can test if the *mhn* package has access to GPU-accelerated
functions using the :code:`cuda_available()` function as shown below:

.. code-block:: python

    import mhn

    print(mhn.cuda_available())

    # the three possible results are also available as constants:
    # CUDA_AVAILABLE, CUDA_NOT_AVAILABLE, CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_AVAILABLE:
        print('CUDA is available')

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_NOT_AVAILABLE:
        print('CUDA compiler nvcc was not present during installation')

    if mhn.cuda_available() == mhn.CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL:
        print('CUDA compiler nvcc available but CUDA functions not working. Check CUDA installation')

Be especially aware of the :code:`CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL` case: This means that the CUDA compiler is installed on your device but basic functionalities like allocating memory on the GPU are not working as expected. In this case something is probably wrong with your CUDA drivers and you should check your CUDA installation.

If you cannot resolve :code:`CUDA_NOT_FUNCTIONAL`  by changing CUDA drivers, we recommend to install the package with CPU support only.
This can be accomplished on Linux via

.. code-block:: console

    export INSTALL_MHN_NO_CUDA=1
    pip install mhn

and on Windows via

.. code-block:: console

    set INSTALL_MHN_NO_CUDA=1
    pip install mhn


If you installed *nvcc* after installing the *mhn* package, you have to reinstall this package to gain access to the CUDA functions.
